Nature is great at stopping us from eating harmful things! On the tongue, the taste buds contain taste receptors that detect ingredients in the things we eat or drink and send taste information like sweet, salty, sour, and bitter to the brain. Taste receptors are meant to detect dangerous or toxic things we put in our mouths by mistake, which often taste bitter.
However, sometimes we need to take medicines that contain a bitter active ingredient. Taking the right amount of medicine helps the body get completely better, but sometimes medicines taste so bitter that kids do not want to take them. The bitter active ingredient naturally activates “warning sensors” on the tongue. Medicines also contain other ingredients, for example to make them into a liquid syrup or a solid form like a tablet or a capsule. These inactive ingredients are called excipients. Think of excipients as the “sidekicks” in medicines. They do not fight the illness, but they help the active ingredient to do its job better, for example to make it last longer or taste better.
This article, written by a team of scientists who are dedicated to designing medicines for children, explains how researchers are trying to make medicines taste better.
Children’s taste buds and taste receptors are more sensitive to taste than those of adults, making the bitter taste of some medicines seem much stronger to kids. Sourness also feels much stronger to kids than adults, and children tend to like sweetness more than adults do. If a medicine tastes bad, kids might refuse to take it, and then their medical problems will not improve. Children’s bodies are different from adults’ bodies, which means that some ingredients that are safe for grown-ups can be harmful to kids. Scientists must make sure that any excipients used in medicines for children are safe for kids to take. So, scientists need to make medicines that are safe, tasty enough that kids are willing to take them, and are also easy to swallow.
To hide the bad tastes of some medicines, scientists use clever tricks called taste-masking techniques. Next, we will describe a few of these techniques.
Something palatable is tasty, enjoyable, and pleasant. Some excipients help a medicine to taste better by making it sweet or flavored, while others help with the texture, making medicines feel smoother in the mouth. Scientists often add sweet excipients to make a medicine taste good enough to take. Some medicines contain a type of sugar called sucrose. Watch out for your teeth, as sucrose can cause tooth decay. It is a good idea to rinse your mouth with water after taking medicines containing sucrose. Sugar-free sweeteners, such as artificial sweeteners or sugar substitutes, are used in low calorie or “diet” foods and drinks. They can also be added to medicines to avoid adding sugar but still boost sweetness. In addition, yummy flavors like strawberry, orange, or vanilla are also often added to a medicine to further help cover up the bad taste.
