Fossil evidence indicates that horseshoe crabs existed as far back as 450 million years ago. This means they have been on Earth longer than most modern-day species. This tells us that they are very hardy and can withstand many physiological (internal) and ecological (the environment around them) challenges. For example, horseshoe crabs are found in coastal waters, bays, and estuaries from Maine to Mexico, so they can cope with a very wide range of water temperatures and salinities (salt levels). They can even survive out of water for several hours, which happens sometimes when they are stranded on beaches during their spawning season. While horseshoe crabs are probably easiest to find in the US mid-Atlantic States, like in Chesapeake Bay, Delaware, they can also be found all up and down the East Coast, and in the Gulf of Mexico. There are also related species (Tachypleus tridentatus) in Asia. If you want to see them, just go to the beach or shoreline during the high tides in May–June, and if you find one of their favorite mating sites you will see hundreds of them spawning.
When horseshoe crabs flap their gill plates to “breathe”, blood circulates through the pages of the book gills, and seawater containing oxygen flows over the outside of the gills and diffuses into the blood. (If you look closely at the gills, you can see why they are called “book gills.”) The oxygen then binds to a respiratory pigment in the blood called hemocyanin. Unlike the respiratory pigment found inside our red blood cells, which is called hemoglobin, hemocyanin is a copper-containing molecule. So, when it binds oxygen, it turns blue—not red like our iron-containing hemoglobin.
Horseshoe crab blood also contains a substance that is important for fighting infections. This substance, called Limulus amoebocyte lysate (LAL), was discovered in 1956. LAL reacts very strongly when it encounters certain bacteria that can cause dangerous infections in humans. So, before you receive vaccines, medical devices, or any other material that is injected or placed into your body, it is first tested with LAL to make sure it is not contaminated with those dangerous bacteria.
As you can imagine, it takes lots of LAL to supply all the hospitals in the country and throughout the world! In fact, in a given year, more than 500,000 horseshoe crabs are bled so LAL can be extracted from their blood for biomedical uses. Unfortunately, after 30% of their blood is removed, 20%-30% of them die, and many of the survivors have low energy. As a result they are less active, and some of our work has shown that bled females spawn only half as many times as non-bled females. This could impact their ability to reproduce and keep the horseshoe crab population stable.
