People who have a healthy lifestyle and good medical care are likely to live about 80 years, often in good-to-excellent health. However, as people get older, their risks for many diseases (some of them potentially deadly) go up dramatically—doubling about every 8 years. Cancer, arthritis, serious problems with thinking and memory, death from flu or COVID-19, and heart attacks all increase with each decade of life, along with cataracts, hearing problems, skin wrinkles, and a long list of other age-related issues. It would be hard to find an 85-year-old person with none of these problems, but rare to find a 20-year-old with many of them.
Three kinds of scientific evidence show that aging and the diseases of aging are linked, and that it is not just a coincidence that all these problems happen to develop at roughly the same age. First, some breeds of dogs (usually small dogs) live a lot longer than dogs of other, larger breeds. Most diseases of aging occur later in small dogs than in larger ones. Therefore, it makes sense to say that aging runs more slowly in small dogs, delaying most aging-related problems and keeping these dogs alive and healthy for longer. This is also true for horses.
Second, data show that most of the age-related problems detected in 80-year-old people also happen in 2-year-old mice, 10–15-year-old dogs, 25-year-old horses, 40-year-old chimpanzees, and 60-year-old albatrosses and elephants. In short, aging runs more slowly in long-lived species of animals.
Third, it has been known for about 90 years that reducing the amount of calories mice or rats eat by 30%-40% can extend their lifespan by about 30%-40% and postpone (delay) most age-related changes. These “calorie-restricted” lab animals have a delay in their risks of many forms of age-related illnesses, and that is why they live such a long time.
These ideas clearly imply that if researchers found a way to make aging run at a slower pace, people would stay healthier for longer and live longer than they do today.
Since the mid-1990s, it has been clear that we can slow aging. In addition to the calorie restriction story, the next compelling evidence came from genetic studies. In the 1990s, several research groups reported that certain changes, called mutations, in specific genes could dramatically increase lifespan in a species of worms called C. elegans. Similarly, mutations that extend the lifespan of laboratory mice were first reported in 1996. Although changing human genes is not practical, these studies raised hopes that it might be possible to find medicines that can postpone aging and aging-related diseases.
The first organized approach to finding anti-aging drugs, called the Interventions Testing Program (ITP), began in 2003. The ITP tests about five drugs or natural products each year to see if they extend lifespan in mice. So far, 14 drugs have been shown to produce longer lifespans in male mice, female mice, or in both sexes. For seven of these drugs, the lifespan increase reached 10% or higher. This is quite a lot: if a similar percentage change could be achieved in people, it would extend healthy human lifespan about three times more than a pill that prevented all adult cancers, or all heart attacks.
